The NHL leaders beat the defending champions on Sunday, with the Chicago Blackhawks' 3-2 win over the Los Angeles Kings extending their season-opening regulation-time unbeaten streak to 15 games.

Brent Seabrook and Jonathan Toews each scored a goal and added an assist for the Blackhawks, whose points streak to open a new campaign has now matched that of the 1984-85 Edmonton Oilers for the second-best in NHL history. The best is 16, set by Anaheim in 2006-07, and Chicago can match that on Tuesday against Vancouver.

Chicago also got a goal from Patrick Sharp, last season's top scorer who had gone 10 games without a score. Mike Richards scored two power-play goals in the third period to pull the Kings within one after Chicago had built a 3-0 lead.

The St Louis Blues' TJ Oshie and Andy McDonald each scored in regulation and in the shootout to lead the Blues to a 4-3 win over the Vancouver Canucks. Patrik Berglund also scored for the Blues, who closed a 3-0 road swing after a five-game skid. Ryan Kesler and Henrik Sedin had their first goals of the season, and Mason Raymond also scored in regulation for Vancouver.

Defenseman Paul Martin scored with 2:04 left and Pascal Dupuis had two goals and an assist to lift the Pittsburgh Penguins over the Buffalo Sabres 4-3. Sidney Crosby also scored and had two assists, including a pass that set up Martin's goal. Pittsburgh won its third straight to move ahead of idle New Jersey atop the Eastern Conference standings. The Penguins were forced to rally after squandering a 2-0 lead. Dupuis tied it at 3-3 with 5:17 left before Martin got his second of the season off a deflection in front of the net. Thomas Vanek had a goal and an assist, and Steve Ott and Cody Hodgson also scored for Buffalo.

Dany Heatley, Jason Zucker and Torrey Mitchell all scored in the second period to rally the Minnesota Wild to a 3-2 home win over the Detroit Red Wings. It was Minnesota's first regulation win this month and just the second time it scored at least three goals in regulation over the past nine games. Damien Brunner and Pavel Datsyuk scored for Detroit, which has lost three straight for the first time this season.

Brad Marchand scored 36 seconds into the third period to lift the Boston Bruins to a 3-2 win over the Winnipeg Jets, who have lost four straight home games. Tyler Seguin and Daniel Paille also scored for the Bruins. Alexandre Burmistrov had a goal and an assist for Winnipeg while Evander Kane recorded his first goal in nine games.

The Calgary Flames overcame a two-goal deficit to down the Dallas Stars 4-3, with Steve Begin, Matt Stajan and Roman Horak each scoring their first goals of the season in the third period for the Flames. Begin snapped a 3-3 tie with 9:30 remaining. Michael Cammalleri also scored for Calgary. Antoine Roussel, Reilly Smith and Ryan Garbutt scored second-period goals for Dallas.

Derek Stepan netted a power-play goal early in the third period to snap a tie and complete the New York Rangers' 2-1 comeback win over the Washington Capitals. Carl Hagelin tied it for the Rangers in the second period after defenseman John Carlson had put Washington ahead in the first.
