The steroid-tainted stars Barry Bonds, Roger Clemens and Sammy Sosa have been denied entry to baseball's Hall of Fame, as voters failed to elect any candidates for only the second time in four decades.

Bonds, who was sentenced in December 2011 to two years probation, for his conviction on a single criminal count related to an investigation over steroids use in sports, received just 36.2% of the vote.

Clemens received 37.6%, after a year in which he was acquitted on all charges that he obstructed and lied to Congress by denying that he used performance-enhancing drugs and subsequently returned to competitive baseball with the Sugarland Skeeters of the Atlantic League.

It was just the eighth time the Baseball Writers' Association of America failed to elect any players. There were four fewer votes than last year and five members submitted blank ballots.

"The standards for earning election to the Hall of Fame have been very high ever since the rules were created in 1936," said the Hall of Fame's president, Jeff Idelson. "We realize the challenges voters are faced with in this era. The Hall of Fame has always entrusted the exclusive voting privilege to the baseball writers. We remain pleased with their role in evaluating candidates based on the criteria we provide."

Bonds, baseball's only seven-time most valuable player, is the sport's season and career home run leader. Clemens, the only seven-time Cy Young Award winner, is third in career strikeouts and ninth in wins.

"It is unimaginable that the best player to ever play the game would not be a unanimous first-ballot selection," said Jeff Borris of the Beverly Hills Sports Council, Bonds' longtime agent.

Sosa received 12.5% of the vote, in totals announced Wednesday by the Hall of Fame and the Baseball Writers' Association of America. Bonds, Clemens and Sosa were appearing on the ballot for the first time and have up to 14 more years to make it to Cooperstown.

Craig Biggio, 20th on the career list with 3,060 hits, topped the 37 candidates with 68.2% of the 569 ballots, 39% shy of the 75% needed. Among other first-year eligibles, Mike Piazza received 57.8% and Curt Schilling 38.8%. Jack Morris led holdovers with 67.7%. He will make his final ballot appearance next year, when Greg Maddux and Tom Glavine will be eligible for the first time.

"Next year, I think you'll have a rather large class and this year, for whatever reasons, you had a couple of guys come really close," MLB commissioner Bud Selig said at the owners' meetings in Paradise Valley, Ariz. "This is not to be voted to make sure that somebody gets in every year. It's to be voted on to make sure that they're deserving. I respect the writers as well as the Hall itself. This idea that this somehow diminishes the Hall of baseball is just ridiculous in my opinion."

Three inductees were chosen last month by the 16-member panel considering individuals from the era before integration in 1946: Yankees owner Jacob Ruppert, umpire Hank O'Day and barehanded catcher Deacon White. They will be enshrined during a ceremony in Cooperstown on 28 July.
