Baseball fans may have wondered when they were going to hear from Marco Scutaro, the NLCS MVP and unlikely catalyst of the San Francisco Giants. He had been quiet in the Fall Classic, but made himself heard in the top of the 10th inning of Game Four, when the Venezuelan reached out and hit a Phil Coke pitch into center field that drove in what would become the winning run of the 108th World Series.

The Detroit Tigers swept, the Giants champions again. The World Series trophy they captured back in 2010 has company – the franchise that won it all five times while based in New York now have a pair of rings in their San Francisco home.

There was little drama in this Fall Classic: no David Freese last-breath strikes to bring Twitter to its knees. Rather, it was a series that brought a different sort of viewing pleasure to the fan. We got to witness a team reach another gear in the final stage of a championship run for all-time, one that formed at lightning speed and swallowed up opponents who thought they had the Giants right where they wanted them.

"Detroit probably didn't know what they were in for," said San Francisco general manager Brian Sabean. "Our boys had a date with destiny and the rest is history."

How can you argue with that? The Giants arrived in Cincinnati down two games in the NLDS, then were down 3-1 in the NLCS to another team that knows something about destiny, the St Louis Cardinals. They wouldn't lose again, winning seven straight as they shocked the Redbirds and rolled over a Detroit team that had their starting pitching lined up perfectly, their hitters confident after sweeping the Yankees. The Tigers had starpower – Justin Verlander, Miguel Cabrera, Prince Fielder. It wasn't enough, not nearly.

There was an energy about this Giants team, a freshness and inner belief that they belonged with the best. They lived on the top step of their dugout, chirpy, loose, free of postseason pressure – the Tigers looked tight, tentative, spooked. The Giants are the sort of team that gets opponents talking... to themselves. Who could blame them?

Bruce Bochy's Giants didn't quite come out of nowhere, but they did come together out of nowhere in the regular season, in the early rounds of the playoffs and in the World Series. We got to see all of it and it was fun, because they were fun, passionate and a group that cared for one another – a team with human qualities that you couldn't help but enjoy watching.

Hunter Pence got the ball rolling – with his team facing elimination against the Reds, the Giants right fielder delivered that now famous pregame speech, widely credited by his teammates with inspiring players to reach within themselves and dig out of their NLDS hole.

"Get in here, everyone get in here... look into each other eyes... now! Look into each others eyes, I want one more day with you, it's the most fun, the best team I have ever been on, and no matter what happens we must not give in, we owe it to each other, play for each other. I need one more day with you guys, I need to see what [Ryan] Theriot will wear tomorrow, I want to play defense behind Vogelsong because he's never been to the playoffs... play for each other not yourself, win each moment, win each inning, it's all we have left."

Inspiring words that come to us via Giants third-base coach Tim Flannery's Facebook page, I should add. They seemed to do the trick, and it was only the beginning.

Giants passed the baton to Giants, each running their race in ways we couldn't have imagined back in July when they were plodding through the schedule, a shadow of the team they would become.

In Game Five against the Cards, Barry Zito was the hero, looking every bit the pitcher he was before the Giants signed him more than six years ago – he stuffed St Louis with their backs against the wall, giving his club the chance to complete a second unlikely comeback. Then Zito did it again, this time against Verlander in the World Series, out-pitching the very best, holding the Tigers to a single run in 5.2 innings. Unexpected. So was the relief job another former struggling Cy Young award winner provided out of the pen – Tim Lincecum, untouchable in his new role, 2.1 innings, five strikeouts.

Then there was Pablo Sandoval, the World Series MVP, who hit 12 home runs all season long but managed to blast three on the biggest and brightest stage. Two of them came off of Verlander – further validation in what would be the game of his life.

Madison Bumgarner emerged in Game Two – fighting a mechanical flaw that nearly derailed his season. He recovered from two postseason shellackings, reverting to form in timely fashion, shutting out the Tigers over seven innings while the Giants scratched out a pair of runs on their way to another win. San Francisco had more than survived the softer side of their rotation, and by the time the Series shifted to Detroit the Giants were in command.

Ryan Vogelsong allowed a single run over 5.2 innings – extending a streak in which he has not allowed one or more runs in his previous seven starts. Lincecum was back again in relief and was overpowering once more, and the Tigers became the first team to be shut out in back-to-back World Series games since the Orioles did it to the Dodgers in 1966 – yet another accolade for a team that torpedoed themselves to the top of baseball.

In Game Four the dominant Giants got to show us something we hadn't seen them pull off since the NLCS – a comeback victory. Playing from behind for the first time in the series, Buster Posey, the comeback player of the year and future NL MVP, hit a home run that gave the Giants a short-lived lead. Delmon Young tied it up for Detroit with a solo shot in the sixth and four innings later, San Francisco's Scutaro was at the plate, putting his team in position.

Then came Sergio Romo, the Giants reliever and poster child – a black-bearded player with the rare ability to run rampant, crack jokes and pull pranks in the dugout for eight innings, and be all business in the ninth. His third save of the Series arrived as he struck out Miguel Cabrera for the final out of the Fall Classic, completing the "upset".

The Giants celebrated on the mound, enjoying the fruits of their performances, ones which were improbable to all who doubted, but never to themselves.
